basic mutton curry
hi man openeth welcome rue sanjeev
kapoor khazana and a warm welcome to a
series of cooking for beginners now what
do we do let's make a basic mutton curry
mutton curry is something that you can
make on any occasion be it just your
everyday cooking or if you have some
unexpected guests at home this curry is
so easy that you can make it in the
pressure cooker and it doesn't take too
many preps you want to have your is
basic spices will quickly run through
the ingredients for this basic mutton
curry I need mutton on the bone potatoes
tomatoes onions ginger paste coriander
powder red chili powder garlic paste
garam masala powder turmeric powder bay
leafs
chopped coriander leaves whole black
peppercorns cinnamon black cardamom
green cardamom cloves salt and some oil
so what I'm going to do now here is I
have a pressure cooker in which I am
going to add some oil now mutton being a
tough meat takes longer to cook so it's
always advisable to use a pressure
cooker but there are some people who do
not prefer using a pressure cooker I'm
fine with that you can do it in a vessel
specially in a thick bottom vessel where
you just have to keep on sorting in the
masala and then let the mutton cook on
medium heat if you put it on very high
heat the mutton may get a little burnt
so I prefer using a pressure cooker so
that once you have everything in and you
have put the lid you are really free to
do your other things at home especially
when it comes to Martin I prefer using a
pressure cooker but if it's chicken or
any other meat doing it in any other pan
is absolutely fine okay so the oil is
valuated after the oil is heated we have
to first add the whole masala we first
add the bay leaf then we'll add some
cloves don't add too much of the whole
masalas because it's very powerful in
flavor and apart from that we are also
going to add garam masala powder towards
the end
so after cloves you've added green
cardamom we'll just add one black
cardamom about an inch of cinnamon some
black peppercorns
that's it and once you saute this you'll
automatically get the flavor of all the
whole spices in this whenever you have
to make any curry like this first you
add in the whole spices and then you add
onions tomatoes and all the other pastes
so you see this nicely getting sorted so
after this we'll add onions I have
onions which are finely chopped the
reason that I prefer chopping Manion
spine is that the Browning happens
faster you see this more the onions
better will be the body or the
consistency of your mutton gravy but you
have to wait for a while till this
actually gets golden brown in color and
this may take anywhere around seven to
eight minutes if your onions are finely
chopped and you will find a lot of other
recipes where they use onion paste now
you could also do that so what happens
when you grind an onion first the water
gets evaporated and then the browning
happens so instead of doing that is
better to chop it up like this and start
your cooking in the meanwhile let me
also tell you one thing these mutton
pieces that I have your are nicely
bashed and mutton whenever you buy make
sure it is bright red in color
never buy pale looking mutton you see
this it needs to be absolutely bright
red in color which means it is fresh
similarly with seafood prawns have to be
white fish has to be absolutely white
and if a fish smells fishy which means
it is not good so let's get back to the
onions you see this now it started
getting pink which means it will start
browning in a while and once it starts
drowning do not leave the pan because it
is born very quickly so we just want
nice golden onions after which we'll add
in the ginger garlic paste now what
happens is if you add in the paste right
now the onions will not Brown so we have
to first Brown the onions and then add
whatever other spices that you want to
add okay now we are going to be adding
tomatoes to this a lot of recipes also
suggest using yogurt so if you were to
add yogurt in your recipe avoid the
tomatoes because if you add yogurt and
the tomatoes the gravy will go sour and
we do not want a sour gravy so it's up
to you I prefer using tomatoes because
the color goes nice and red
apart from tomatoes I also use a
Kashmiri red chilli powder which also
gives very good color to the gravy okay
so you see this the onion
have started turning golden we will now
start adding the ginger-garlic paste
first because that also takes some time
to cook the raw flavor of garlic and
ginger has to go or else it doesn't
leave a very good flavor lingering on
your tongue so this needs to be sorted
along with the onions if you are
attending to the pan continuously you
can leave the flame slightly high but if
you are doing your other things also in
the kitchen make sure this sorting is
done on low heat okay you see this this
is just perfect now we start adding all
the other dry spices again I have
lowered the heat because spice is born
very fast since it's in powder form this
is coriander powder red chili powder
kashmiri red chilli powder actually
turmeric powder and just give it a mix
after you have sorted all the masalas
now let's add the mutton pieces like
this one by one we will add the mutton
here please make sure that the mutton is
fresh a day old mutton also will take
longer time to cook of course if we get
cooked but it will definitely take a
longer time after you have added the
mutton let's add some salt here and this
needs to be sorted really well with all
the masalas we have yet not added as our
tomatoes that we will add after we see
or the mutton will I believe in searing
the mutton along with the masalas the
searing of this mixing needs to be done
on high heat or else the mutton will
start leaving water and we do not want
that to happen at this stage so make
sure the flame is high and you have to
keep on mixing this in the meanwhile
let's do something let's add some
coriander also your I prefer sauteing
coriander leaves rather than adding it
just as a simple garnish so let the
coriander also get roasted in the masala
and here we have to add but it was after
you have added all of this mix it again
nicely since we are using the kashmiri
red chilli powder you find the colour
going red and a red mutton curry
definitely looks very appetizing
so after you have mixed everything well
it's now time to add
my toes so let's add tomatoes here and
some more salt we've already added some
salt in the beginning so now a little
less and again just give it a mix we
have to saute this till the tomatoes go
slightly soft and that's when we'll add
water and let this cook on medium heat
so you see the tomato they've gone soft
let's add water and so after you have
placed the lid we will cook this till
about 6 missiles are given out on medium
heat of course if it's on high heat it
could be anywhere around 10 to 12
whistles but 6 whistles are needham heat
the mutton will be done but the mutton
has to be very fresh a day old or a day
or two old mutton takes more time to
cook of course it will cook but maybe
about 10 missiles after the whistles are
given out let the pressure cooker rest
for a while till all the pressure
settles down and then we will see how
the mutton curry looks right now we'll
wait for all the whistles to be given
out okay so now let's see how this
mutton curry looks open the pressure
cooker after the whistle or the pressure
has settled down the color is perfect
let's switch on the heat now we have to
add two ingredients here one is the
garam masala powder garam masala powder
should always be added towards the end
because we added for flavor and
fragrance so in this case it is just for
flavor and fragrance and this needs to
be added towards the end so little bit
of garam masala powder and coriander we
will add after we serve this the
potatoes also have coat has got slightly
mashed into the gravy this is exactly
how we should make it this is like
Melton mouth mutton curry just take this
and hmm
just effect very soft mutton why because
it was very very fresh spice levels are
just as needed the color is perfect
the tankyness is right there this is
just fine let's switch off the heat okay
so you scoop the mutton curry out in a
serving bowl and we'll garnish this with
some chopped coriander that's it simple
or basic mutton curry is ready serve
this with piping hot steamed rice and
make this recipe just the way I have
made it and you'll be very proud of
yourself